INTRODUCTION
------------

The package contains an implementation of the Covariance Matrix
Adaption Evolution Strategy (CMAES). Implemented is the basic strategy with
box constraints using C++ and the Eigen package for matrix calculations.
We follow [1] for the pure CMAES extended by a "boundary handling" as decribed
in [2]. Both papers are linked on 'The CMA Evolution Strategy' Website [3]

The software was first implemented in 2016 and extended here by record keeping
alternatives.


PURPOSE
-------

This implementtion is intended to optimize parameters of ocean models.
It is most suitable, if the running time is approximately the same
for different parameter vectors.
Here, we don't provide an example ocean model but benchmark functions
together with a corresponding operational parameter file "nIter0.dat"

Originally, a single folder was used for file communication between cmaes
and model runs. Here, we add the option to use subfolders for each iteration
and subsubfolders for each iteration's member (model run).


APPROACH
--------

Optimization is done by chain jobs alternating CMAES optimization steps with
multiple parallel model runs. The number lambda of model runs corresponds to the
number of sampled parameter vectors in each CMAES iteration (population size).
In each iteration, the serial CMAES job is started using "serial.job." It
samples lambda parameter vectors from a probability distribution and writes
them to files called "parameters_i_j.txt" where i is the current iteration
number and j stands for the session number in {1,...,lambda}.
All parallel model evaluations are started using "parallel.job".
NOTE: Each model run is supposed to read a parameter file and to write the
results to corresponding files called "fitness_i_j.txt".
After termination of the model runs, a new CMAES optimization step is started
reading fitness values from the files, updating probability distributions and
sampling new parameter vectors.
After the i-th iteration, CMAES stores necessary data for the next iteration(s)
in a file "algVars_i.txt" which is read in iteration i+1.
Operational settings and an iteration history is recorded in the file
"nIter.txt", which is accessed by both job files.


USAGE
-----

Generating Executables
----------------------

The package consists of the files
- README.md             // this file
- cmaes.cpp             // the main source of the CMAES algorithm
- auxiliaries.cpp/hpp   // some auxiliary functions required by CMAES
- eigenreq.hpp          // path to required EIGEN algebra package and some defs
- testfunctions.cpp     // collection of testfunctions for optimization
- Makefile              // generates executables
- nIter0.dat            // sample interface file (with operational settings)
- serial.job            // serial job file (starting CMAES optimizer)
- parallel.job          // parallel job file (starting parallel model runs)

In order to generate executables, the "Eigen" algebra package must be available
on the system. It can be downloaded from
  http://eigen.tuxfamily.org
as ".tar.gz" file and simply extracted to some place on your system without any
installation process (cf. http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/dox/GettingStarted.html).
The Makefile must be adapted to contain the right path then, i.e., you have to
change the Makefile line spelling
  EIGEN = -I /gfs1/work/shmvolki/eigen-eigen-36fd1ba04c12/Eigen/
to contain your own path to the Eigen folder.
The "cmaes" executable should then be generated by typing "make".

Operational settings:
---------------------

Operational parameters must be set in the file "nIter.txt" which will be
accessed by the jobfiles and also serves as iteration history.
The file "nIter0.dat" is a template that can be copied to "nIter.txt".

Currently, also the file "parallel.job" which runs multiple model evaluations
in parallel has to be modified. Namely, the walltime, the number of nodes and
the number of processors per node have to be adapted to fit your requirements
(according to the requirements for a single model simulation, multiplied with
the number of sessions set in "nIter.txt").
The settings in the template "nIter0.dat" are for the "rosenbrock" testfunction
of dimension 5 using 50 CMAES iterations with 8 samples per iteration.

Running Optimization:
---------------------

On GWDG one optimization is started typing "sbatch serial.job". 
It is possible to continue a terminated optimization by increasing the
iteration number in nIter.txt and doing "sbatch serial.job" again.
Also in the case of an iterruption caused by technical problems, optimization
can be continued at the point it has been interrupted. In that case, the last
iteration in "nIter.txt" must be deleted if the fitness values of that iteration
have not all been written to the corresponding files!

NOTE: For tests on local mashines, you can use the bash script "unchained.sh".
      For both, job files and bash script, we also provide versions to support
      record keeping using iteration and member subfolders:
      "serial_genlevel.job", "parallel_genlevel.job", "unchained_genlevel.sh".


LITERATURE
----------

[1] N. Hansen (2016). The CMA Evolution Strategy: A Tutorial. arXiv.

[2] N. Hansen, A.S.P. Niederberger, L. Guzzella and P. Koumoutsakos (2009).
    A Method for Handling Uncertainty in Evolutionary Optimization with an
    Application to Feedback Control of Combustion.
    IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 13(1), pp. 180-197

[3] CMAES website: https://www.lri.fr/~hansen/cmaesintro.html
